---
title: "Scents of Empathy: The Olfactory Art of Anicka Yi"
order: 60
layout: essay
---
“Vinyl, steel pipes, metal bowls, beeswax, dried shrimp, glycerin soap, hair gel, metal pins, seaweed, foam, plasticine, pigment powder, worklight.”[^2] This is the museum wall label for artist Anicka Yi’s work, *Your Hand Feels Like a Pillow That's Been Microwaved* (2015). This label, with its bizarre combination of items, is characteristic of Yi’s wall texts, which read more like “alien shopping lists” than descriptions of her works.[^3] This strange, list-style of labeling, however, fits with a key interest of Yi: the world of smells. In particular, Yi’s labels function like notes of a perfume, emphasizing the many parts, seen or unseen, working together in her art pieces. I will focus on these olfactory aspects of Yi’s art, selecting key works that deal with smell and air. Namely, I am interested in how Yi’s olfactory art centers intersections of gender, race, and species to criticize a hegemonic obsession with vision, cleanliness, and odorlessness, ultimately building empathy for the marginalized and invisible. Like Trask, Yi “rescents” the traditional olfactory narrative, as she reclaims the physical medium of smell to upend derogatory stereotypes, especially towards Asian women.

While there are examples of olfactory art from the 20th century, smell has been an especially potent medium for contemporary artists to discuss themes of environmental risk, feminism, immigration, memory, disease, and the non-human. Interestingly, one of the main works that initiated questions of transcorporeal, olfactory art did not intend to do so. This was Ai Weiwei’s *Sunflower Seeds* (2010), a pile of almost 100 million hand-painted ceramic sunflower seeds, which the Tate Modern deemed too toxic to interact with because of the risk of dust inhalation.[^4] This instance demonstrates a key point of olfactory art, which is that no matter how hard museums and the art world insist on an exclusively visual relation between visitors and art, the invisible, transcorporeal world still seeps through. Smell has also permeated the art world despite its academic critics. Immanuel Kant, for example, classified smell as the sense with the least aesthetic potential because of its intimacy to the body, subjectivity, and ephemerality.[^5] In fact, it is these very characteristics that have made the olfactory sense a fascinating subject for contemporary artists.

There are many possible explanations for this recent turn to smell. One, as argued by Hsuan Hsu in “Olfactory Art, Transcorporeality, and the Museum Environment,” is that olfactory art “activates museum air as an aesthetic medium and highlights the manifold ways in which our bodies literally incorporate that air,” making it a powerful avenue to resist the separation of nature from the human and and showcase environmental risk.[^6] In this vein, Hsu also argues that the conservationist approaches to art and nature work hand in hand, both framing the environment as needing preservation from humans.[^7] Olfactory art, however, defies this framing, using its transcorporeal nature to showcase how humans intermingle with, and ultimately are, their environments. Another reason experimental artists have utilized smell is due to its ability to encapsulate a particular time and space. For example, Marcel Duchamp’s *50 cc of Paris Air* (1919) displayed a glass ampoule containing nothing but Parisian air. By putting forward air as his primary visual subject, Duchamp’s work questions the idea that air is empty and links the air—and its smell—to the environment and notions of place.[^8] Olfactory art, in this way, possesses great potential as a medium to explore themes of migration, geography, and cultural identity. Additionally, olfactory art often brings to the forefront elements that society would like to repress, including disease and contagion. This is especially relevant considering that miasma theory, which viewed “bad,” smelly air as the agent of disease, was the norm in Europe until the late nineteenth century.[^9] Related to this weaponization of smell, groups such as women, people of color, immigrants, workers, and non-humans have been systematically discriminated against on the basis of scent. Such discrimination underscores the fact that scents are subjective, so any hierarchy of “good” or “bad” smells simply reiterates the beliefs of institutional power structures. However, contemporary artists like Anicka Yi have queered this hierarchy, reclaiming and redefining smell in their own way to support intersectional feminist discourses and recognize the reparative potential of scent.

In a *New Yorker* article on her interest in smells, Yi wrote, “The smell of fermenting kimchi and *doenjang* seemed to sink into our furniture, clothing, and hair. As a child, I often felt ashamed of my family’s olfactory world. I wanted to smell American, which I imagined would involve becoming perfectly odorless.”[^10] In this sense, Yi’s olfactory art has roots in her personal background and identity as a Korean American woman. Yi, who was born in Seoul but later migrated to Alabama and then California, often discusses feeling invisible as a Korean American in America.[^11] It is interesting, in this way, that Yi has turned to scent, which is also a trope of invisibility. Although Yi only began making art in her mid-30s, she quickly appropriated her fascination with smell into her art. Consequently, “Yi has made air her primary material and subject."[^12] In particular, Yi uses smell’s somatic and tangible qualities to foreground a critique of structures in the art world and broader society, which connect the gaze and odorlessness to masculinity, whiteness, and power. Yi has explored the repercussions of these power dynamics, asking “How do we imagine that immigrants, or foreigners, smell? Do we think of the interiors of taxicabs, or Chinese takeout, or feet? As a child, these questions horrified me, but as an artist I have learned that there is power in finding the fascination that lurks in that feeling.”[^13] By dissecting this feeling, Yi recovers smell as a way to repair people’s relationships with one another and the world: “I believe we’ve lost our empathic core because we’ve neglected these other senses, like smell and touch and taste,” Yi said.[^14] Especially, smell can facilitate empathy because it necessarily collapses the distance between the smeller and smelled, drawing the audience closer and requiring interaction. For Yi, this potential manifests in her focus on cultivating empathy for (not exclusively) Asian and Asian diaspora women, who have been systematically marginalized, objectified, and dehumanized.

In order to demonstrate this practice, I would like to begin by analyzing *Tempura Fried Flowers*, a collection from Yi’s 2022 exhibition in Seoul, *Begin Where You Are*. Tempura fried flowers have been a repeating motif in Yi’s work from her earliest exhibitions. One reason this pairing is interesting derives from its clashing of scents, as Yi “upends the usual odor sensations associated with fresh flowers: the nosegay’s rosy fragrance is replaced by the unctuousness of the wok.”[^15] Interestingly, both scents are tied to Asian women, who are stereotypically associated with the feminine, “exotic” fragrances of lotus/cherry blossoms and the greasy odors of culinary labor. Thus, the hybridization of the tempura fried flowers showcases the multifaceted and paradoxical imagination of the Asian woman. The tempura flowers also symbolize a liminal state between life and death, as if the flowers—often representations of vitality—have been frozen in time by the frying process, “suspended permanently in a process of decay.”[^16] Some of the tempura flowers have also been placed in cardboard boxes resembling tombs. According to English and gender studies scholar Rachel Lee, this echoes the practice of adorning burial sites with flowers to represent that “the route taken by the metabolites of these blooms as they volatilize mimics the airborne mode that a soul must travel in going from the earthly to the spiritual realm.”[^17] In this sense, Yi’s work deals fundamentally with the invisible and transcorporeal, as symbolized through fragrance, hybridity, and transformation.

Yi’s 2021 exhibition at the Tate Modern, *In Love With the World*, builds on these themes with an emphasis on human’s coexistence with machines. In this exhibition, Yi has created what she calls an “aquarium of machines” in the Turbine Hall, which float as jellyfish-like, amoeba forms, programmed on artificial intelligence software.[^18] Inside the hall, Yi has included multiple scentscapes that transition weekly. These smells are associated with specific historical periods in Bankside, including marine scents of the Precambrian period, plant smells from the Cretaceous period, or spice fragrances used to treat the Black Death.[^19] These scentscapes reinforce the fact that we share, and have always shared, our environments with many living and non-living things, from dinosaurs to viruses. Specifically, Yi is interested in a “politics of air,” and she conceives of air as a “sculpture we inhabit” to highlight how “the space is not empty but filled with the air we all share, and on which we depend.”[^20] In this way, *In Love With the World* decenters the human, imagining a world of harmonious exchange with nature and machines. Her use of olfactory and machine art also challenges notions of what art is, and it is particularly relevant that Yi has used scent in this space—the Tate Modern in London—which is connected to power. “I talk a lot about how power has no odor,” Yi said. “This is why you should not be smelling any odors when you walk into a gallery in Chelsea, or when you walk into a bank. These are places of power and sterility, oftentimes associated with the masculine.”[^21] By introducing smell to the Tate Modern, then, Yi acts as a feminist intervention to the smell policing of patriarchal institutions, exposing the idea that smell can be powerful in its own right.

Perhaps the most crucial display of Yi’s exploration of smell is her 2017 exhibition at The Guggenheim Museum, *Life is Cheap*, which won the Hugo Boss Prize. This exhibition followed the 2016 election of President Donald Trump and explores themes related to this political climate. *Immigrant Caucus*, for instance, conjures up migration and borders. This work signals the entrance to the exhibition, and it involves three pesticide canisters placed before an iron gate, emitting a scent derived from the combination of Asian American women and carpenter ants. According to Lee, “While the canisters allude to late 19th and early 20th century sanitary techniques of delousing the presumed ‘dirty’ immigrant at the Mexican border, Yi repurposes them in her exhibit to diffuse a mist that rather than killing insects might prime the viewer to the advantages of cross-border contacts.”[^22] These canisters and their fragrance thus encourage a hybridized perspective that values cultural diversity and exchange. The other two works in this exhibition, *Lifestyle Wars* and *Force Majeure*, display the scent’s elements on opposite sides. Specifically, *Lifestyle Wars* depicts a circuit board of real carpenter ants as they travel through the tunnels, following the same perfume from *Immigrant Caucus*. Reflecting on why she chose to use ants, Yi said, “Ants fascinate me, with their matriarchy, industry, and powerful sense of smell, which they use to recognize the caste of other colony members,” noting that ants are also the only species other than humans that practice slavery.[^23] Yi was also interested in ants because of their possible association with Asian American women, as both are stereotyped as hardworking and lacking individuality.[^24] By drawing these women and ants together, and having the audience literally stand between them, Yi encourages an ecofeminist, multispecies empathy. Across from *Lifestyle Wars* is *Force Majeur*, a powder room of growing bacteria cultivated from women sampled in Manhattan’s Chinatown and Koreatown neighborhoods (swabbed from their cheeks and vaginas). Yi spotlights the formal aspects of this bacteria, which grow in dynamic shapes and colors on the plexiglass tiles. Lee argues that this artistic quality reparatively embraces the notion of Asians as “invaders”: it is as if Yi is saying, “yes, Asians are like invading microbes and haven’t you noticed what great artists they are?”[^25]

These works from *Life is Cheap* are the clear descendants of Yi’s exhibition, *You Can Call Me F* (2015), which harnesses the potency of bacteria and femininity to criticize institutional sexism. In *Grabbing at Newer Vegetables*, Yi sampled cheek swabs from 100 women in her social network, including many female gallery owners in New York City, to spread and mutate on agar with the titular words “You Can Call Me F.” This title suggests femininity, as “F” may be a stand-in for “Female” or “Feminine,” though the shortening also gives the work a techno-futuristic feel. Over time, this title has been obscured by the bacteria, and the smell of the samples, which one visitor described as like “parmesan cheese or rancid butter with sour floral accord up top,” grew stronger.[^26] For Yi, the desire to bring together women and create art from their collective bacteria came from her personal experiences with gender in the art world. In her words, “Women getting together is seen as threatening, so it’s diminished into something frivolous. I was frustrated that I wasn’t seeing more females helping each other in this very aggressive, competitive place in the art world.”[^27] Building on this, Yi’s *Fontenelle* juxtaposes the scent of the female collective with the imperceptible odor of the Gagosian Gallery, one of the most prestigious contemporary art galleries in the world. This friction between the female bacterial network and the patriarchal gallery space becomes manifested in motorcycle helmets, which diffuse the combination of these scents into the gallery. In the art world and beyond, Yi thus “aligns society’s growing paranoia around contagion and hygiene (both public and private) with the enduring patriarchal fear of feminism and potency of female networks.”[^28]

Yi’s work, then, underscores the prevailing strength of femininity and female networks, as symbolized through hybridized scents, carpenter ants, or multiplying bacteria, to name a few. Despite society’s attempts to contain and control smells and women, Yi’s art demonstrates how things always seep in eventually, creating a beautiful, smelly, interwoven world. Yi puts this simply: “There is nothing but ceaseless porousness.”[^29] Smell, as a medium, wonderfully demonstrates this permeable quality, and Yi masterfully uses it to cultivate empathy through art. In doing so, Yi crafts a better future, one she imagines will further redefine scent: “I’ve always thought of my work as being on the precipice of a lot of discoveries that happen with smell. The day when we can smell a jpeg is probably just around the corner.”