---
title: "*The Book of Salt*: Love, Diaspora, and a New *Fu-Manchu*" 
order: 70
layout: essay
---
In *The Book of Salt*, Monique Truong weaves together stories of diaspora to spotlight the trauma and abuse that Empire has imposed on the subaltern. Primarily, *Salt* tells the stories of three diasporic characters who have traveled across oceans to live in Paris during the 1920s and 30s. These figures are Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas, based on their historical counterparts, and Bình, their Vietnamese cook. Bình represents the countless “nameless” Asians whose stories have long been ignored by the Western literary canon. Far from nameless, however, *Salt* deeply probes Bình’s character, exploring his position at the nexus of race, sexuality, and class identities. Told from Bình’s point of view in a reparative manner, *Salt* invokes smell with abundant olfactory and culinary language, as one might expect from a chef. In this way, I argue that *Salt* effectively rewrites *Fu-Manchu*’s olfactory logic by reclaiming the perspective of the subaltern character from the “East” and centering their sensory experience. Utilizing smell as a trope of love and diasporic memory, Truong rejects the imperialist notion that olfactory representations might only be used to other. Instead, *Salt* makes space for a fragrant healing.

In the context of a new *Fu-Manchu*, Bình represents an interesting hybridization of characters. As a queer Asian man, Bình exists in the margins, setting him apart from a white masculinity that figures like Dr. Petrie or Nayland Smith embody. This makes him similar to Fu-Manchu, who author and playwright Frank Chin interprets as a “sexual joke, glorifying white power”:

> Dr. Fu, a man wearing a long dress, batting his eyelashes, surrounded by muscular black servants in loin-cloths, and with his bad habit of caressingly touching white men on the leg, wrist, and face with his long fingernails, is not so much a threat as he is a frivolous offense to white manhood. (95-96)

Dr. Fu’s emasculated and queered identity therefore antagonizes him in *Fu-Manchu*, but in *Salt*, Bình’s queerness is central to a story of desire and longing. Additionally, Bình’s occupation as a cook is reminiscent of Fu-Manchu’s expertise as a chemist. Again, then, Truong reclaims what was weaponized in *Fu-Manchu*, recognizing cooking/potion making as sites for diasporic creation and sustenance.

Alternatively, Bình might also be read as a revision of Karamaneh’s character. For example, both are oriental servants who move between various “employers.” The texts focus on two employment trinities, with Karamaneh serving Petrie and Smith while Bình serves Stein and Toklas. Though Karamaneh and Bình may enter the home space, such access is selective, demonstrating their lower status. This is a reminder of Homi Bhaba’s concept of “colonial mimicry,” as Karamaneh and Bình reflect the Other “as a *subject of difference who is almost the same, but not quite*” (126). However, Bình is “not quite” Karamaneh either. Unlike Karamaneh, who personifies the Orientalist fantasy of absolute Oriental servitude, Bình serves whiteness with rebellion, as his narration often renders Stein and Toklas as ignorant rather than all-powerful. As a result, *Salt* imagines a rewriting of *Fu-Manchu* in which Karamaneh subversively criticizes those she serves.

Most pertinent to this project, Bình also resembles Fu-Manchu and Karamaneh due to his “other” scent. As he attempts to find a job, Bình laments, “I am accompanied by the stench of the unemployable” (Truong 15). Here, the use of “stench” conveys the strength and permanence of Bình’s joblessness, which elicits social disdain and further prevents him from finding work. Even when employed, though, smell still haunts Bình. Especially, the Messieurs and Mesdames Bình works for “prefer to believe that their cooks have no bodily needs, secretions, not to mention excrement” though Bình counters, “we all do” (64). By ignoring the bodily grotesque, these French employers seek the impossible, unfairly punishing their laborers for natural excretion. Thus, olfactory abuse is two-pronged in *Salt*, as the French elite both discriminate against marginalized figures for their scents and penalize them when an expectation of odorlessness is unmet.

As part of such policing, the symbol of the sniffer dog reappears in *Salt*, as in *Fu-Manchu*. This time it is Stein and Toklas’s dogs, Basket and Pépé, who surveil Bình by his scent. When he gets drunk and throws up in the Bilignin home, Bình believes the dogs’ “noses must have been offended by the strong smell of alcohol that my vomit released into the kitchen. I can imagine that their barking then reached a particularly persuasive pitch” (141). In alerting Stein and Toklas of Bình’s impropriety, the dogs use scent as a means of control, affirming their status as “supervisors” to the dehumanized cook. Like Basket and Pépé, the chauffeur also attempts to control Bình. Notably, he prescribes a “decreased intake of garlic, ginger, and other ‘hot’ spices” as a “cure” for Bình’s “condition” of queerness (128). The chauffeur’s idea that sexuality could be medicalized as a symptom of sensory overload charts how the senses (especially of smell and taste) can be degraded to instill homophobia, racism, etc. Like Empire’s desire for subaltern deodorization, the chauffeur calls for a repressed diet in order to repress Bình’s homosexuality. This dual “repression” backfires, however, as the spices actually become symbols of queer desire, objects that, according to Bình, the body “naturally craves” (128).

This theme of craving is an important element of *Salt*; beyond the sexual, characters also crave greater social status and the smells that come with it. Bình’s maritime friend [Bão, for instance, compares ships and explains that he prefers the *Latouche Tréville* to the *Niobe*. Though Bão never says why,]{.mark} Bình postulates that it was the luxurious fragrances that drew [Bão]{.mark} in:

> [Bão, I imagined, liked being so close to luxury, so intimate with its smells, the rumpled linens loaded in his arms, lavender-scented still by the fresh-bathed bodies of women whom he would never meet, the perfume and cigar smoke still dancing in the air as he mopped the decks clean at three in the morning…like all servants he *had* to take solace from wealth and pleasure, even if they were not his own. (108)]{.mark}

[For subaltern characters like Bão, then, smell allows a momentary social transgression, an imagination of what it would be like to live in the upper echelon of society and be surrounded by its scents. By the same token, characters avoid the smell of the impoverished: “No one wants to stand so close to desperation. It is too thick in the air. It is naturally invasive, has the dank odor of musty rooms and vacant houses, a distinct taste, tangy and burning on the tongue” (220). The determination of class, thus, relies on a multisensory playbook, distinguishing the “dank odor” of poverty from “lavender-scented” luxury. With odors acting as class indicators, these two instances reflect how smells instigate a push and pull—attracting people towards the scent of wealth and propelling them from that of scarcity. Bình in particular is attracted to a white-passing Black man named Marcus Lattimore. Unlike Bình’s, Lattimore’s fragrance helps him to blend in, as “Miss Toklas approved of the scent of bay and lime on \[his\] skin. Like a Frenchman, she thought, announcing himself even before he enters the room, making an impression even after he is gone” (38). Perhaps what Bình desires most is for smell to help him achieve such “passing.” Then, his smell might fool others into believing he belongs, even if he does not think so himself.]{.mark}

[However, characters like Bình and Bão never realize the status they desire, as Truong forgoes the goal of cultural assimilation for one of imperialist undoing; by taking the subaltern perspective and centering smells/foods, *Salt* ultimately challenges the hegemony of Empire by discrediting its sensory order. As the abundant olfactory language above suggests, the text disrupts a dominant hierarchy of senses by prioritizing subaltern olfaction. In fact, it is scent that inspires Bình’s realization that his lover Lattimore (Sweet Sunday Man) has left him: “I know by the smells. Fresh paint and fresh air can mean only one thing” (236). For Bình, smells denote truth and understanding, conveying olfaction’s value. Moreover, in *Salt*’s hierarchy of the senses, smell seems to overcome sight. At one point, Lattimore tells Bình that “of the five senses, the one that he most distrusts is our ability to see. It is the one most easily fooled” (236). Lattimore’s profession as an iridologist, one who uses the eyes to assess a patient’s health, further supports the shortcomings of vision. Though this practice does elevate the eyes as “windows” to a person’s health, it also points to them as signs of disease and bodily fragility. By corrupting the eyes, Truong protests Empire’s historic privileging of sight as the superior sense.]{.mark}

[The trope of food in *Salt* builds on this attack of imperialist sensory hegemony to critique colonialism. Because the text tracks the stories of various cooks, it is no surprise that food, its taste and smell, holds power. Bình’s brother, Anh Minh or “Minh the Sous Chef,” recounts one particular story of a chef’s rebellion:]{.mark}

> [After all, the *chef de cuisine* at the Continental Palace Hotel in Saigon—a man who claimed to be from Provence but was rumored to be the illegitimate son of a high-ranking French official and his Vietnamese seamstress—had to be dismissed because he was serving dishes obscured by lemongrass and straw mushrooms. He also slipped pieces of rambutan and jackfruit into the sorbets. “The clientele demanded that the natives in the kitchen be immediately dismissed if not jailed, shocked that the culprit was a harmless-looking ‘Provencal’ incensed enough to threaten closure of the most fashionable hotel in all of Indochina.” (42-43)]{.mark}

[In this case, the *chef de cuisine* reclaims his labor by breaking boundaries and sneaking traditionally Vietnamese foods/herbs into the Continental Palace Hotel, a glaring monument to French colonialism and tourism. This anecdote engages with Truong’s larger point that the subversion of Empire employs foods and scents. Especially, smell’s ability to “threaten closure” of the hotel signifies olfaction as an engine of subaltern might—capable of “closing” Empire.]{.mark}

[Food also functions more figuratively in *Salt*. For Bình, learning the language of the colonizer feels like he had been “born with \[French words\] in my mouth, as if they were the seeds of a sour fruit someone else ate and then ungraciously stuffed its remains into my mouth” (11-12). Truong thus calls upon food metaphors to critique linguistic imperialism and emphasize Empire as a bully. Wenying Xu quotes Truong’s metaphor in “Sexuality, Colonialism, and Ethnicity in Monique Truong’s *The Book of Salt* and Mei Ng’s *Eating Chinese Food Naked*” and details its symbolic nuance:]{.mark}

> [Truong’s brilliant metaphor offers a precise picture of the hideous coercion in the name of civilizing the Other. The seeds planted so “ungraciously” in the colonized sprout vines and branches to crowd out and suffocate indigenous cultural consciousness. In time these seeds are bound to bear “sour fruit” of racial grief. (140)]{.mark}

[Xu draws attention to how the “seed” metaphor works to convey the prolonged consequences of colonial rule, noting that imperialism brings grief and melancholia past Empire’s departure. The metaphor also functions reparatively, though. While Bình mourns the struggle of knowing little French, as his vocabulary is mostly limited to that of culinary labor, he resourcefully uses this culinary focus to inspire food metaphors that attack the colonizer. Pigeon-holed in a French-ruled society, Bình embraces the pigeons.]{.mark}

[Most importantly, it is Bình’s sense of smell that allows him to survive, love, and remember what he has left behind. By reclaiming olfactory language to support Bình’s diasporic journey, Truong asserts smell as a vital sense on a personal scale—it is inextricable from the subaltern individual’s story of healing. Starting on a basic level, smell supports Bình’s livelihood. As a cook, a strong sense of smell is essential, so Bình’s olfaction likely finances his career and promotes his survival as an immigrant. Gertrude Stein agrees that one needs a sense of smell to cook, and even more, she blames her own olfaction for preventing her from becoming a doctor. Stein, who would “would rather drink a glass of spoiled milk than bother to smell it beforehand,” claims that “one must possess a keen sense of smell in order to identify and, more importantly, to distinguish among the odors emitted from the body during its varying stages of decay” (181, 180). In medical school, these smells haunt Stein, “combining all her patient’s beastly odors into a solid wall of filth and stink, a wall that she was absolutely unwilling to breach” (180). Stein’s refusal to deal with such odors reflects an imperialist need for deodorization, but in this case, this desire emerges as a weakness. Therefore, Bình’s superior olfaction, and his willingness to smell, proves Bình eclipses Stein on some level. Scent, then, protects Bình and his attempt to survive despite marginalization. Smell aids other characters, too, like the blind vendor who sells pungent vegetables. Bình shares that it is “no coincidence that this man sells what he does. With onions and garlic, he can protect himself from thieves, because he can always smell them walking away” (62). It is also “no coincidence” that Bình cooks—this work gratifies Bình’s smell to nourish his professional status and ultimately empower him.]{.mark}

[Beyond such survival, smell permits love, adorning the romantic and sensual moments in *Salt* with fragrance. According to Bình, “the truffle is a gift for the nose. Pleasure refined into a singular scent, almost animal, addictive, a lover’s body coming towards yours on a moonless night” (210). In Truong’s world, smell and pleasure are entangled, and the scent of the truffle symbolizes this intersection. Particularly, the setting of a “moonless night” evokes a landscape of darkness, allowing scent to come to the forefront as the sense of love and lovemaking. Truong especially details the smells of queer desire from the narration of Bình. As mentioned earlier, Bình identifies his lover by the smell of lime and bay. As Bình and Lattimore have sex, Bình appreciates his smell: “Your body comes close, and the scent of lime and bay is all around us” (146). Smell, in this way, denotes the sensual, as the mingling scents symbolize the couple’s sexual uniting and queer love. Interestingly, queerness pairs well with olfactory symbolism, perhaps due to smell’s marginalized status and transgressive qualities—scent breaks “rules,” just as queer lovers do.]{.mark}

[Lattimore’s epithet, “Sweet Sunday Man,” builds on the association between love and smell, as “sweet” is a gustatory and olfactory adjective. Such sweetness repeats when Bình recounts the story of how his mother and likely biological father met. In this encounter, foods and smells are prominent. Candied lotus seeds, for example, “sweetened their first sighs of love” (170). Additionally, when Bình’s mother becomes pregnant, “her hair grew thick, shiny with oil, and smelled of the fresh orange peels that she used to mist her comb” (170). In these instances, Truong connects romantic and maternal love to a sweet scent. Furthermore, Truong uses seed imagery of flowers and fruits to describe this smell, adapting her earlier metaphor of the seeds of colonialism to proclaim the seeds of love in a reparative manner. Love therefore burgeons, fruiting like a seed to incorporate multiple senses. This agrees with Bình’s answer, when Stein asks him to define love. Love is *not* something, he says, “seen but untouched”—it is smelled too (40).]{.mark}

[In this manner, Bình’s appreciation of scent distinguishes him from the Old Man, his abusive, alcoholic father. The Old Man often devalues smell, especially despising the smell of women. In reference to “women with bulging money belts and a willingness to embrace whatever gods necessary,” Bình recounts that the Old Man “could not stand the sight of them, the smell of them” (201). The Old Man thus highlights how scent and gender intersect, as scent may be applied to reinforce misogyny. Additionally, when the Old Man and Bình’s mother sleep together, the Old Man attempts to dissolve his sense of smell, removing the “sense” from the “sensual.” In particular, the Old Man “had to touch this girl who smelled like the only woman he had ever loved. It sickened him each time. He committed the act quickly and without ever closing his eyes” (201). In this instance, the Old Man upholds a hegemonic hierarchy of the senses, making sure to keep his vision while degrading olfaction as “sickening.” For the Old Man, vision protects and sustains his power. At the same time, however, Bình’s mother “kept her eyes close” and she thinks to herself, “He can make me open my legs, but never my eyes” (201). In this way, it is the *absence* of sight that empowers Bình’s mother, as this allows her to dissociate from the pain and reaffirm her bodily autonomy in a moment of vulnerability. The senses, then, in *Salt* hold vastly different purposes for each character, sometimes spurring love and other times protecting from love’s lack.]{.mark}

[Beyond love, Truong emphasizes the powerful connection between scent and memory. For Bình, aromas create a thread to his “origins” despite diaspora, tying him to Vietnam by triggering memories of it while in Paris. For example, when Bình receives an envelope from his brother, he first sniffs it, noting that “It smelled of a faraway city, pungent with anticipation for rain” (5). The faraway city here is Saigon, and it is scent that is primary, before vision, in this moment of diasporic memory. The smell of food, in particular, draws Bình to memories of his homeland. When Bình shares a meal with the enigmatic “man on the bridge” in Paris, smells of Vietnam abound: “When we opened our mouths to speak, the night air became scented with cinnamon,” and again, “the aroma of cinnamon, unmistakable and insistent, especially when coupled with sugar and heat, surrounded us” (99). In this instance, the fragrance of cinnamon becomes all-pervasive, taking over the French air. Cinnamon here may symbolize Vietnam, as it is an essential spice in Vietnamese cuisine, flavoring the broth of phở, for example. It is interesting that the dish here is apple pie, often considered a quintessential American dessert. But the cinnamon in this dessert comes from South and Southeast Asia, a product of colonialism. Truong, therefore, complicates the origins of apple pie, connecting it to Bình’s own origins in Vietnam. During this meal, the diners also encounter the scents of morel mushrooms, “hidden below the haricots verts until their aromas gave them away,” and watercress, “unmistakable, bitter in the mouth, cooling in the body, greens that any Vietnamese could identify with his eyes closed” (97). Xu proposes that this watercress represents the struggles of Vietnamese people:]{.mark}

> [Watercress is a vegetable that evokes the diners’ love of and longing for their homeland, a vegetable that conjures up the aroma and taste of the flooded land of Vietnam. At a symbolic level, this vegetable also stands for the people of Vietnam, who are misunderstood and overpowered by their colonizers. (Xu 146)]{.mark}

[Xu further extends this metaphor, describing how watercress rebels when overwhelmed by heat, turning into ropes that are impossible to swallow. Truong, then, suggests that the Vietnamese refuse to be ruled by colonists, displaying fervent anti-imperialist sentiment via culinary metaphor. In such a way, foods, and their scents, anchor Bình to Vietnam and Vietnamese affect. As Xu delineates, “Memories of exile are often evoked by kitchen activities, the partition between past and present rendered porous by food, smells, and tastes” (136). Thus, smells in *Salt* blur boundaries of time and place through recollection and remembering.]{.mark}

[Finally, the olfactory sense inspires memory of Bình’s mother, bringing them together across the physical distance of oceans and the metaphorical distances of time and death. Scent engulfs Bình’s relationship with his mother, even from its conception: Bình remembers, “Before my mother could take me into her arms, I smelled her. Before I could take in my mother’s milk, I tasted the salt on her nipple” (217). This maternal scent and taste dominates Bình’s first memories, underscoring its significance. Specifically, Bình’s mother smells like oranges, the scent of the “fresh orange peels that she used to mist her comb” when pregnant with Bình. As Bình says goodbye to his mother when departing Vietnam, he “kissed her cheeks, taking the time to smell the oranges in her hair” (175). The citrusy fragrance holds multifaceted memories for Bình, then, reminding him of his mother, but also their separation. More than just fruit, though, all smells of cooking remind Bình of his mother, as he grew up cooking with her in the kitchen. One particular memory, when Bình was nine years old, is of cutting vegetables with his mother, his “fingers, face, hair, stinking of raw scallions” (72). As such, memories of Bình’s mother evoke not only past imagery, but fragrance. This memory is also of the first time that Bình cut himself with a kitchen knife, bleeding into his food, which becomes a habit over time. Doing so reminds Bình of his mother. He feels, when the cut is deep enough, “there is an ache that fools my heart. Tricks it into a false memory of love lost to a wide open sea. I say to myself, ‘Ah, this reminds me of you’” (74). The pain of the cut, for Bình, cannot be separated from the memory of his mother. As Xu notes, “Bình cuts himself to remember his mother, who is the only love in his loveless world, and this comfort of recalling her love is associated with pain” (142). Such bleeding also initiates a boundary crisis, excreting subaltern bodily fluids into the social system, just as white imperialists worried about. Yet this time, Truong reclaims the blurred lines from the subaltern perspective: this permeability is a tool for subaltern remembrance, enabling Bình to cross the sea and return to his lost mother. As a result, I believe that *Salt*, in a way, functions as Bình’s memorial for his mother, who is revealed to be deceased later on in the text. Smells feature fundamentally in this memorial, scenting the bond between mother and child indelibly.]{.mark}

[Therefore, *The Book of Salt* rewrites *Fu-Manchu*, developing scent as a medium for marginalized characters to live, love, and hold on to diasporic memories. This last section, on memory, introduces scent as a bridge between past and present, one crossed by those in the Asian diaspora to remember that on the other side. I am reminded of Ocean Vuong’s *On Earth We're Briefly Gorgeous* when discussing Bình’s relationship with his mother. Writing in the form of a letter from son to mother, Vuong shares:]{.mark}

> In Vietnamese, the word for missing someone and remembering them is the same: nhớ. Sometimes, when you ask me over the phone, *Có nhớ mẹ không?* I flinch, thinking you meant, *Do you remember me?*
>
> [I miss you more than I remember you. (186)]{.mark}

[Vuong’s questions confront the separation of the verbs “to miss” and “to remember” in the English language. Where does missing end and remembering begin? Since Vietnamese is also Bình’s native language, perhaps Bình’s grief expresses the word *nhớ* as a hybridization of longing and remembrance as well. Memory, thus, is muddled: hybrid, subjective, and smelly. And memory, it is important to note, is necessary to overthrowing Empire—how can one cast away what has been forgotten? In the fall, I will write the next chapter of my honors thesis, “Fish,” which will explore memory in greater detail, examining recollection from an ecological perspective with consideration of the nonhuman world and its odors.]{.mark}